last time we talked about the simplest
curves and surfaces in space also known
as lines and planes and today we'll talk
about more more complicated objects of
the same kind
also curves and surfaces okay so let me
just briefly remind you what we did last
time I know it's a warm September
afternoon and you want to be elsewhere
some of you may be but you will you will
get there just you know the sooner we
start the sooner we finish okay so I
want to use up from now on I will be
using this notation r3 for the
three-dimensional space
so R is for real numbers and then we
write R to the N where for the N
dimensional space so our two would be
the plane and our three will be the
stage mention of space okay so sometimes
it will be convenient to just abbreviate
instead of saying space now lines and
planes in r3 can be can be defined or
represented in a very concrete way which
we discussed last time for lines
it's a parametric form which means that
each of the three coordinates in r3 is
written as a function of an axillary
coordinate which we call T but it could
be any other coordinate any any other
letter you like so let's use T so then
it the formulas will be look
follows X is x0 plus 80 and y is y 0
plus BT Z is Z 0 plus CT where these
numbers are given this are x0 y0 and z0
and ABC are given and they correspond to
the following x0 y0 and z0 are
coordinates of a particular point on
this on this line and ABC is a
particular vector which goes along this
line we call it direction vector
so that's ABC so each of the coordinates
is written as a function of T and this
tells us a parameter is a and it gives
us an explicit parameterization of this
line in other words for each value of T
each value of T gives rise to a
particular point on this line for
instance T equals 0 corresponds to this
point t equal 1 corresponds to this
point and so on
[Applause]
now for planes we did something
different for planes we did something
different a plane doesn't have a
direction vector right a plane is not
determined by one direction is
determined by two directions or two
vectors like like so that's why it's a
two-dimensional object if it could be
determined by one vector it would be
one-dimensional like a line so in fact
if we wanted to imitate the same
procedure for planes we would have to
choose two independent coordinates we
cannot parameterize the entire plane
which is two dimensional object by one
coordinate we have to parameterize by
two coordinates now it's possible to do
that in fact eventually later in this
course we will talk we will be talking
about permit ization of surfaces but for
now we try to choose the more economical
way and the more economical way for a
plane is instead of writing a parametric
form to write down one equation and put
that equation instead of trying to
determine the plane by things which
belong to it we determine plane by
something which is orthogonal or
perpendicular to it by a normal vector
which is our favorite my favorite image
of this class so far okay so very easy
to remember so that's a normal vector so
see the point is that there are two
vectors that this will be two
independent vectors determining the
plane but it's also determined by one
vector which is perpendicular to it so
the parameter ization instead of
informatization we have one equation and
the equation has the form a times X
minus x0 plus B times y minus y0 plus C
times Z minus Z 0 is equal to
and I'll draw it here so that's the
plane and that's a normal vector I draw
it a different color it's not the
direction vector is perpendicular
perpendicular to the plane that's why we
call it n we call it n a normal vector
and that's the vector ABC so these are
the data ABC which are given the
coordinates of the normal vector
components of the normal vector and
again there is a particular point chosen
x0 y0 and z0 as before you get this
equation by looking at the by using dot
product so to derive this equation you
use the dot product but at the end of
the day what you get is this is this
kind of equation and this lets you write
the describe mathematically
algebraically describe a given plane
once you know point and and the normal
vector and there are various ways in
practice to find those data from the
information which is available for
instance the typical problem on homework
is like this suppose you are given three
points and that there is a unique plane
if the points are in generic position
there is unique plane which passes
through all of them then the question is
to write down an equation of this sort
how to do that well you need one point
in one and one normal vector so you have
three points choose one of them and then
you need to find a normal vector and you
know you find a normal vector by taking
a cross product of two vectors which
belong to the plane which you can easily
find by subtracting coordinates of this
of this point so you get this n is the
cross product of this guy and this guy
so that's the way you do it you just
obtain the information needed for this
formula by using the information which
is given are there any questions about
this okay good
so what's next so next we'd like to
understand more complicated objects in
in the thickness of space in r3 and we
start with with with two-dimensional
objects so we want to look at more
complicated more complicated surfaces in
r3 now the question is what's the next
example to consider okay so here we have
a plane we understand the planes were
fairly well it's a very very simple
equation and so what so what is an
important feature of this equation well
if you look at this formula it's
actually a good idea to open the
brackets sometimes it's a good idea to
open the brackets and really think of
this as a function of XY and z on the
left hand side so if you open the
bracket you open the brackets you get ax
plus B y plus cz plus you're given to
get a combination of ax 0 and so on
which I will I would like to kind of
convert into N 1 into 1 symbol chaco D
so D is just negative a 0 negative Y
negative b y0 negative cg 0 okay but
it's kind of long so but but the point
is that all these numbers are given
which all of them are given so it is a
number unlike x y and z maybe maybe i
it's good to emphasize that by using
different charts so you want to see the
very important point is these are
variable
this our variable and these are numbers
they are given in any given problem this
will be some particular numbers so one
two three five whatever so we look at
this we look at this formula and we see
that on the left hand side the left hand
side is a function of three variables X
Y Z of the simplest possible kind
simplest possible kind means that each
variable enters in degree at most one at
most one so it's a polynomial of degree
less of degree one the polynomial of
degree one
so what I'm trying to say is that
suppose we were just just for the sake
of it we were to try to write down
various function in XY and Z so what are
the simple things that we could possibly
write well first thing is the constant
function it's kind of this is sort of a
trivial example in some sense the
constant function or maybe just any
number not necessarily one you could
write square root of 2 or PI or 3 or 10
whatever but if one is a number it's not
it's independent of the variables so
that's the simplest function at the next
level we've got x y and z these are
monomials in X Y Z of degree one right
at the next level we can form x squared
Y squared and V squared and we can also
have a mixed combinations like XY XZ
and why Z so these are monomials of
degree two these are monomials of degree
2 and this are of degree 1 and if you
want this is of degree zero
and of course you can continue so next
you would write X cube Y cube D Q and
then you'll have mixed terms of
different of different kind it's
actually it's in it's a very interesting
question to see how how the number of
this independent monomial grows as the
degree grows it actually grows very fast
going to grow very fast so it's actually
good a good exercise to find a formula
for the number of independent normal so
if you here you have one and you have
three then you have six what's the next
number so anyway you don't have to do
now but think about it it's a good it's
a good question so if we if we are if we
want to be methodical one way to
approach the question about general
general functions in three variables or
general surfaces in r3 which are
essentially very close the questions
which are close to each other then we
should start with the simplest ones with
surfaces defined by the simplest
functions and then progress and include
more and more complicated ones of course
we're not going to go all the way you
know 2 3 4 up to 10 but at least if you
want to do the next possible example we
might as well just go to the next step
in the next level in this picture so
what we've done so far and that's my
point
it missed the first two levels because
the most general expression which
involves this four guys the constant
function the monotony and the monomials
of degree one is precisely what's
written on the left-hand side of this
equation so using that expression is an
equation you get the simplest possible
equation that you can write on three
variables and sure enough it gives you
the simplest possible surface namely
plane applying
so now if you would like to continue and
go to the next level
we should include paranormals monomials
of degree two okay and this way we get
what's called quadratic surfaces which
is one of the subjects of today's
lecture quadratic sources so the idea is
to include all monomials of degrees zero
one and two and that should be viewed as
a natural generalization of the planes
which include all monomials of degree
zero and one okay so the question is
what kind of services do we get this way
what do they look like this should give
us a good set of examples which might be
convenient in the future when we talk
about general services we can test
things not we'll be able to test things
not only by using planes but also using
those quadratic terms that is the
general idea
now another general idea is when you get
a problem in our three try to do it in
r2 or maybe even r1 in other words if
you get a problem in the three
dimensional space try to look at a kind
of a beta version of that problem in a
smaller dimensional space which would be
in this case a plane the problem this
problem is already meaningful or a
similar problem it's already meaningful
in r2 so look at let's look at
look first at the analogous problem in
r2 we only have two variables x and y
okay and so it's easier to analyze what
other crease pointing curves I remind
you that in our tool because it's
preventional if we impose one equation
we are going to end up with a
one-dimensional object because 2 minus 1
is 1 right so in r2 we can also impose 1
equation of the form linear combination
of all monomials of degree 0 1 and 2 so
that would be x squared let me keep
using the red the red color x squared y
squared and then you've got X Y and then
you also have a constant so you'll have
some a x squared plus B Y squared plus C
X Y sorry
and of course you also have the ones of
DB 1 so you have plus X so be some D
plus some e y plus some ABCDEF
so it's a little bit easier because
there are fewer fewer monomials in two
variables if you only have two of degree
one and you have three of degree of
degree two as opposed to three and 6
respectively in dimension P so what does
this represent what does this equation
represent well the point is that it
looks like there are too many
possibilities because there are seven
three parameters ABCDE 6 / x7 / m6
parentheses 620 so too many right but of
course the let's think about this way we
can always see for example we we can
combine some expressions into a square
then we can always say that by changing
variables slightly we will get we will
eliminate some subjects and parameters
so what I mean to say is the following
say this is something that we looked at
before when I talk my circles suppose
you have an equation like this F minus 1
squared plus y plus 2 squared equals 1
right so if you open the bracket you end
up with like x squared minus 2x plus 1
plus y squared plus 4 y plus 4 equals 1
so you know then you bring you bring the
terms and so it's like x squared minus
2x plus ah let's write first the second
DB plus y squared minus 2x plus 4y and
then you have 1 plus 4 minus 1 so plus 4
so this is an expression like this the
only thing it so it's almost like a most
general expression except there is no
term with X Y but you've got x squared Y
squared x and y if it looks like it
looks quite complicated but the point is
that if you complete this if you
complete this 2 square and this will
square you actually end up with
something much more manageable because
we can say let's introduce new
coordinates X prime which is X minus 1
and Y Prime
which is why powerfu okay then if you do
that in substitute
then we actually then we actually will
end up with X prime squared plus y prime
squared equals one and that's a circle
right that's a circle of radius one but
with respect to this new coordinate so
what does it mean for the original
problem well the original problem it
simply means that we have shifted the
origin in the in the XY plane this is
the original XY plane and we introduced
new coordinates X prime and y prime so
for example when X is 1 that corresponds
to X prime equals 0 so what we've done
is we will introduce new and new
coordinate system by just simply
shifting the the old axis we've shifted
their y-axis by one because now this
this is X equal 1 but x equals 1
corresponds to X prime equals 0 and
likewise we have the second line here
which corresponds to y equals negative 2
which is nothing but y prime equals 0 so
we've got a new coordinate system with
new coordinates X prime and y prime
right and the point is that the circle
this is the equation of the circle in
this new coordinate system where the
circle has as the center the origin of
this new coordinate system so it looks
like this that's the circle we're
talking about but if we can understand
it in a new coordinate system that
surely then surely we understand it in
the old coordinate system because what
it means simply is that it is a killer
circle but it's a circle centered
instead of the origin of the old
coordinate system centered at the point
at the point let me write it in white
emphasizing that these are the
coordinates in old coordinate system 1 &
2 1 and negative 2
a scepter do you see what I mean are
there any questions like this by by
choosing slightly better coordinates you
get a much better expression for for
your equation okay so then the question
is really not so much to understand what
each of this equations gives rise to but
what is the simplest form to which we
can bring this equation by making a
similar coordinate change so what kind
of coordinate changes are allowed first
of all shifts are allowed like this X
goes to X -1 Y goes what plus 2 that
certainly it should be allowed because I
mean we don't lose anything clearly we
can work with this coordinate system in
as much as we can work with this
coordinate system the other thing which
we should allow is rotations rotations
of the plane which would mean the
following you have this is your original
coordinate system and say you rotated by
30 degrees PI over 6 and you end up with
this coordinate system so again this is
not such a big deal because you know
think about it if you look at like this
you see this coordinate system but if
you look like this you get this one so
it's the same thing it just depends on
your point of view they are equal it's
just it's we shouldn't approach things
with prejudice and say that it has to be
like this because none of there is no
reason to say that this coordinate
system is better than this one well
there is an important point that when we
rotate when we rotate we preserve the
angles and distances
so the essential critics of geometry are
preserved and then in this sense we
should not really worry too much if we
can get a better shape of the equation
by making a rotation so all of this was
to say that even though the original
equation if you write it in the most
general form looks very complicated you
can choose you can always choose a nice
coordinate system to bring it to much
simpler form and so what are these
simpler forms that we can get
[Applause]
we call it we call it sometimes the
canonical form so the canonical form for
some other variables in other words
there always exist some variables in
which you will get the canonical form
now those variables would would be more
appropriate to call X Prime and Y Prime
but I don't want to make a formula look
too heavy so I will use again X&Y
even though with respect to the original
equations this will not be X&Y but it
will be some X Prime and Y Prime
okay so what are the what are the what
are the possibilities the first
possibility it looks like this x squared
over a squared plus y squared over B
squared equals 1 this is something we
have encountered before when we talked
about curves on the plane this isn't
this is what's called an ellipse you can
see the point is we surely know very
well what the picture looks like if a
and B are both equal to 1 it's again the
circle of radius 1 which we keep talking
about right which one distance very well
what we've done now is we've divided the
coordinates x and y by a and B which
simply corresponds geometrically to kind
of squishing or expanding depending on
whether a is lesser or greater than 1
expanding the picture along that axis so
the result of this is not a circle but
something which you get sort of a
squished circle let's let me draw let me
do a picture for it this is what it will
look like if a is greater than B if a is
less than B it will be squished in this
way and in this picture this is a and
this is negative ad and this is B and
this is negative D why because if you
substitute X equal
you get from this term you get one and
then you substitute y equals zero and
you get the equation so surely this coin
belongs to it and for the same reason
this point belongs to it and similarly
if X is zero and Y is plus or minus B
these two points we also get an equality
so that's an ellipse now the second the
second way the second possibility the
second possibility is a like this x
squared over a minus 1 a squared minus y
squared over B is equal to 1 and that's
that's that's called a hyperbola
hyperbola squared so what does it look
like you see again I can plot a point
where it intersects the x axis I can
take a here and I can take negative a
and see this is great because if you
take a squared over a squared minus 0
which is 1 so this is like those points
but you cannot do the same as before
because if you substitute B instead of Y
you get B squared over B squared but you
get you have a negative sign so that's a
key difference here you have plus and
actually I would emphasize that here I
have plus in both terms and here you
have minus
and because you have - you have - here
and so this is not equal to one anymore
it's equal to negative one right so
those two points will not show up and in
fact instead what the curve will look
like it will look like this now if you
think that you are not familiar with
this you're mistaken you are familiar
and because we have static hyperbolas
and hyperbolas but usually we write hard
pebbles by the equation y equals 1 over
X or maybe some coefficient you know C
over X you see what we used to call
hyperbola before is given by this
equation the graph of the function 1
over X right this is why y equals 1 over
X the way I drew it it looks like it's
going to intersect the x-axis but it's
not right it's called what is what's
called a template so that we have there
- item static lines - this graph which
has the coordinate axis so this is a
very familiar picture so what's the
connection between this picture in this
picture to speak to to understand this
connection let me let me talk about the
special case when a and B are equal to 1
and the general case is very similar
when a and B are equal to 1 what this
looks like is y - x squared minus y
squared equals 1 and now here's the
trick I can write this as X minus y
times X plus y and now I'm going to
perform a kind of transformation that I
talked about here namely I will choose
new coordinates X prime which is
x- x minus y and y prime which is x plus
y if you make this transformation then
this equation becomes x prime times y
prime is equal to 1 which is the same as
to say that y prime is 1 over x prime
which is our old equation for the
hyperbola so you see at first glance
there is no connection whatsoever
between this formula and this formula
but there is a connection and you do
realize with connection by using this
transformation now what does it
transformation represent this
information actually represents rotation
by 45 degrees I'm simplifying things a
little bit because actually what it is
it's not just rotation but also it's a
composition of the rotation by 45
degrees and also multiplication of
everything by a by a factor of square
root of 2 so there is a square root of 2
here which is due to the fact that the
cosine and sine of PI over 4 is 1 over
square root of 2 but it's it beside the
point here let's not worry about this
it's a minor issue at the moment what is
important is that there is if I make a
transformation like this which is a
essentially rotation by 45 degrees I
bring this form to this form ok and so
that's the power of this kind of
transformations which it allows you to
relate equations which at first glance
look look very different but in this
particular case we can actually use we
can use this transformation to take
advantage of our knowledge from before
and knowledge of the hyperbola to
understand what the graph what sorry
what this curve looks like in this case
because what it looks like is just the
old hyperbola rotated by 45 degrees and
if you rotate it by 45 degrees that's
exactly what you get rotate this that
picture is rotate rotation of this
picture by 45 degrees clockwise
yes why is the clockwise because you
have to when you look at this form you
have to explain why this rotation by 45
degrees and not by negative 45 degrees
so this is something by the way which is
the subject of another mathematical
course called minus 54 and I know that
some of you may have taken it or are
planning to take it so that's the course
where this kind of stuff will be
discussed in a very systematic way here
we're not going to really add well on it
too much I'm just giving you this as an
example of the advantages of changes of
coordinates and also by way of
explaining why this picture will appear
if you want to study that equation this
is the explanation because I have
reduced the question of drawing this
curve to the question of drawing this
curve which we already knew okay so
these are not the only possible cases
without not the only possible scenarios
for for the quadratic curve this is case
two so there is another important case
which I'll call case three you see the
point is that up to now in the left hand
side I only had monomials of degree two
x squared + y squared I did not have
monomials of degree one and the third
case is the case when you do have
monomial of degree one and that's the
case when you have which I'll write like
this y + - in this case it doesn't
matter y plus x squared over over a
squared is equal to here and now that
that also something which we know very
well that's a parabola because actually
wrote it in such a way that we can we
can quickly recognize here a graph of a
function minus x squared over a squared
[Music]
so and so that's this Parral that's this
parabola and also if you want you also
you can you can add the other one where
you would have y minus x squared over a
squared equals zero so that's the
parabola so this is red and this will be
yellow because that's like y equals x
squared or YZ so to travel one going
upward the other one going downward in
some sense you can argue that these two
equations are also equivalent because
you can get one equation from the other
by flipping the sign of Y if you put
negative Y is the same as putting a
minus sign here so it becomes a subtle
issue as to which coordinate changes do
you allow do they have to preserve our
in patient or not so I don't want to get
into this so if you want to think think
that there are two different cases sub
cases here parabola pointing upwards and
parable pointing downward so they said
this has a generic this has a generic
quadratic sources called quadratic
curves I'm sorry because we are on the
plane so this a quadratic curve
letsa not all of course because if I
really instead
if I really insist on the most general
equation like this I might as well take
an equation in which there are no
quadratic terms whatsoever there are
only linear terms but if I do that I go
back to the case of degree one or degree
zero and one more precisely and that's
the case of a line so I end up with a
line we have all these cut lines so
we're not losing any generality here by
assuming that actually there are some
non trivial quadratic terms and equation
then you get one of those three cases so
all of this was by way of illustrating
what we are up against now when we would
like to understand the similar similar
question in in space in our three
instead of our two seen our two it's
easier to explain there only there is
three cases but now we need to
generalize it to the case of a three
dimensional space which was our original
problem after all right now we are
dealing with our three and we trying to
understand curves and surfaces in a
three this was a good digression though
anyway because it also gave us some
useful information about curves on the
plane so in r3 we have to also include
include our third variable Z squared
which will also give rise to to the two
cross terms like this X Z and Y Z with
some coefficient so it will be some
ABCDE F G and H and K and then there
will be some linear term so there's a
whole bunch of additional terms
additional terms we have to include
however as I already explained in the
case of a plane we want to transform
this equation to the simplest possible
form and in on the plane we get this
three cases and on in space we are going
to get the full in cases which I'm going
to explain now
okay so again
transform to a nicer expression by using
a different coordinate system that would
be a kind of canonical form canonical
form for quadratic surface so what are
these canonical forms they look very
similar they look very similar to what
we had on the plane the first you see
the first few cases first few cases will
be just like on the plane on the
left-hand side we are going to get it
have a sum of squares or combination
squares with different cliffs with
different signs plus or minus so the
first one is when all signs are plus and
it's very easy to understand what this
is just like the way we understood just
the way we understood the ellipse
because there is a special case which we
understand very well a special case when
a is B is and B and C are all equal to
one then we get the equation x squared
plus y squared plus V squared equals one
and that of course is a sphere of radius
one which is centered at the origin this
is something we discussed before so we
already know sphere so when I said well
you know planes I actually wasn't it
wasn't quite quite true we know we
already talked about the spheres so this
here is a special case of that but not
only it's a special case of this but
this is the case which will help us
understand the general case the way we
were able to derive the ellipse from
from a circle because what we see is
that now by dividing this coordinates by
a B and C we have basically squished our
sphere in a certain way in each of the
three or
expand it if you will depending on
whether a B and C are greater more than
1 or less than 1 we shrunk or expanded
the sphere in each of the 3 directions
and so what you get it kind is a kind of
the kind of an egg I don't know right so
that that's that's a lot of surface is
called an ellipsoid you think though you
take the names for the quadratic curves
and you use you to change the f e at the
end by as oh I D no not as anyway you
change the hint by oh it let's let's
cover the terminology will be formed so
you'll have ellipsoid hyperboloid and
parabola it oh by the way I forgot to
state the right so this is a parabola
and we'll get paraboloid in space okay
so what what does it look like it looks
like this it looks like a sphere well to
be able to draw this you have to know
how to draw a sphere to begin with and
then you kind of try to squish - squish
everything a little bit I don't know
that's my interpretation this is a kind
of a contemporary art interpretation
over now when I always throw it think of
an egg by the egg is not quite
symmetrical usually like it's got a
higher degree of symmetry okay I will
not do I will not try to make it better
you beauty you do it you try you try to
get a better picture I think it's pretty
I think it's pretty clear so what's next
well clearly just by analogy with with
with with the two-dimensional case we
need to allow some of the signs to be
negative okay
and then there are there are several
options
this you've got you've got yourself
three times in front of x squared in
front of Y squared in front of Z squared
and so you can play with them any way
you like
and so let's see what the results are so
you've got these squares now over C
squared and this is equal to one now
that the point is the problem is in two
dimensions we only had two choices plus
or minus you see at first glance it
looks there are two more choices because
you could have minus plus or minus minus
but if you have minus plus it's the same
as this one plus minus if you just real
able the variables x and y you just
label the variable so it's not
essentially new that's number one number
two you cannot have - - because - x
squared minus y squared well even if you
divide by whatever a squared + B squared
this is going to be negative always or
zero it will never be equal to 1 and on
the right hand side we purposely put one
so we exclude that possibility that all
of them are negative so some of them
have to be positive and some of them
have to be negative and what counts
really is not which ones are which but
how many pluses and how many science
minuses here all three are pluses so the
two remaining cases are when when when
there are two pluses and one minus so
that's sort of like case two point one
and then you have these two point two
which is where when you have one plus
into - so that would be x squared over a
squared plus - so so this is plus always
and it's minus
- and - and so the question is what do
you get in those cases and here to
analyze to analyze this what is useful
is to to consider what sections I will
illustrate this notion in the case of an
ellipsoid even though my drawing is not
that great but I will try to explain it
so see this is a little bit surface
which is like a sphere you know what
let's just look at this here maybe it's
better so that can emphasize the most
important aspect of a section without
straining our eyes with that we're gonna
store it so here so this is our
coordinate system okay and this is a
sphere let's see if I can do it so this
is a circle and this is like this is
like the equator and this is equator on
the other side it's more or less looks
like it's like it's like a sphere okay
that's a sphere so now what is what
exactly is this equator what exactly is
the equator I claim that the equator is
nothing but what you get by intersecting
the sphere with the XY plane remember
this is the XY plane if you if you cut a
sphere with the XY plane what you'll get
is precisely this equator so the
original equation was x squared plus y
squared plus V squared equals 1
now cut by the plane by the XY plane and
the equation of the XY plane is Z equals
0 right it's XY plane so x + y could be
arbitrary but Z is equal to 0 XY plane
but Z is equal to 0
so if you cut by Z equal 0 it simply
means that you start which is equal to 0
into the equation and so you end up with
the equation x squared plus y squared
plus 1
and that's a circle and sure enough we
see that that's the equator which we are
used to which we knew was there in to
begin with now the interesting point is
you can cut by others or other planes as
well
we can cut by a plane for example v
equals 1/2 so that's the plane which is
parallel to the XY plane but is just
it's it's a little bit above it at the
height of 1/2 when we do that we are
going to cut a smaller circle which is
like one of the if you think about this
as the earth as the glow as the globe
this will be the parallel one of the
parallels and so on so you so that you
can think of in fact you can think of
its sphere of the entire sphere as a
collection of those sections as you you
can cut by the split you can slice it by
those planes and each time you slice it
you end up with a circle so if we didn't
know what the sphere looked like we
could just imagine the collection of
those slices and kind of put them
together into it's like if you don't
know what the loaf of bread looks like
but you have a collection of all the
slices you can kind of reconstruct in
your mind what the bread must look like
by kind of imagining those slices on top
of each other or or side by side by side
so that's the idea of understanding
surfaces you have to realize that the
surface is really a collection of curves
those curves are obtained by slicing it
by parallel planes for example Z equals
a constant or instead of Z equals a
constant you could slice it by x equals
a constant or y is equal to constant and
that's the way we can analyze this
picture and each time we slice it
each time we slice it we are going to
end up with a curve and that curve will
be one of those familiar curves which we
have already discussed so this is the
way to understand what those surfaces
look like you try to to see what what
the sections what the slices are and
recognize you recognize the slices
simply because you have already we have
already understood what what the
quadratic curves look
so but I don't want to spend the whole
hour explaining to you every detail of
this so I'll just give you the answer I
will just draw you a picture what it
looks like and then I will justify it by
a similar argument okay so the first one
the first one that I will draw will be
the picture for for the case two point
one where just two point one where you
have two pluses in one - okay
so what does it look like I claim that
it looks as follows
so this is the parabola which I had
before the parabola and then I rotate
this parabola around around the z axis
so it's going to look like this like
this okay you get that here and the
reason is very simple so of course I
mean the use of board I don't want to
draw the coordinate system on top of it
because it's already pretty messy so I
don't want to make it more messy so I'll
just draw it on the side but you see it
should think that because the D axis is
here I'll just let me just throw the z
axis this is the z axis but so this is
the x and y is the usual coordinate
system this is the z axis so how do I
know that it's like this well the point
is if you substitute some value of Z you
see it's going to be minus Z squared
over C squared equals 1 but then I take
it to the side so I get 1 plus Z squared
over C squared so I get some positive
number and I get the equation x squared
divided by a squared plus y squared
divided by B squared is equal to this
and I already know that that is an
ellipse so that means that my surface is
going to be a collection of ellipses
which the smallest which the smallest
size will be 1 z is equal to 0 and then
it sort of grows in size when Z becomes
larger positive number for number or
large negative number so that's how I
know and finally I can also look at that
I can slice it by by a DX
Blayne and when I slice it by the
explain that means I said y equals zero
and then I recognize hyperbola so in
this picture you recognize two old
pictures at the same time
nice two old pictures one is an ellipse
that's an ellipse which you get by
setting V equal zero ellipse but you
also recognize in this picture hyperbola
which you get by taking by setting X is
equal to zero
and that's a hyperbola well it's not
really a circle because at 's equal zero
I'm going to get x squared over a
squared plus y squared over B squared
equals 1 right and we have already
decided that this is an ellipse it's
almost like a circle and for the
purposes of this diagram or this picture
you know in approximation which I use it
looks like almost like a circle but we
have to realize whenever whenever I draw
a circle I include all possible ellipses
as well but they look so much alike an
ellipse and a hyperbola look very
different so then I would not mistake
one for the other I should not mistake
one for the other
but ellipse and a circle in first
proximation is almost the same so in my
picture I will not distinguish between
them so this is a dilator the surface
which combine an ellipse and a hyperbola
and that's why it's called an elliptic
hyperboloid elliptic hyperboloid
that's right so I was going to keep it
and that's Ben's because then I was
going to make another one and say what
are we going to do because they have two
different names but now you spoil it so
that's okay it has one sheet which it's
connected there are no this is just one
piece and so then this already suggests
that the second in the second case we
actually are going to get more than one
so we are going to get in the second
case we are going to get going to get to
two pieces two sheets so in second case
I'll just draw the picture without
exploit without explanation by the
explanations are obtained the same way
so in the second case you see I have I'm
going to have to I'm going to have two
parabolas sorry two hyperbolas X Y and X
Z I'm going to have hyperbolas and so
it's going to look and she was the best
way to draw it
whyyyy okay it's going to be like this
so it is like taking a hyperbola and
rotating it but in a different way like
this so that's right that's right so so
this is now actually I will draw the
coordinate system because it's not going
to make up the picture too much so this
is X Y Z so this is a hyper these two
things are hyperbolas this and this have
the two branches of the hyperbola which
is its include Z and Y I know I didn't
do it right I didn't do it right yeah
yeah yeah okay you can tell what I did
what I wanted to do you see what you
have with in my picture x and z if you
look from the point of view of x and z
then you'll get two lips ellipses so X
and Z should have the same sign and not
so it's like this so the hyperbola the
type of this hyperbola is in the zy
plane so to get it I have to I have to
just detain the G&Y part of the picture
and that's Y squared take it and at work
I got this place right okay please
that's good so this is x equals zero you
see so this is this is the case when X
is equal to zero I just set the closure
I get this and that equation is if this
red is a red one that's this one okay
again I will not I don't have time to
explain every detail to this you'll have
to figure this out why right like this
and I will draw you one more picture
because we have to also tackle
paraboloid and there are there are two
types of paraboloid and elliptic
paraboloid and and hyperbolic paraboloid
and elliptic paraboloid it's kind of
easy is just like rotating the parabola
around the z axis but the really cool
one is is the hyperbolic paraboloid and
that one is the hardest one to draw and
used to I used to do very good pictures
of that one let's see I can if I can do
it okay let me just let me just draw it
and then we'll move on
[Music]
so it's like a saddle you see there's a
saddle point you see what I mean
not so banner thank you so anytime
anytime you need a hyperbolic
paraboloids call me
except except on on the exams okay I
will note that I will not make it to it
so don't worry all right
but you should be able to visualize it
so that's that's the hyperbolic
paraboloid now so you see the the upshot
of all this is that we get a whole
variety of surfaces by simply going from
equations involving just degree one
monomials to equations which involve
degree two monomials or and lower and so
that's a very interesting that's a very
interesting example which kind of
indicates the variety the huge variety
of services that we have in
three-dimensional space okay so that
that's what we wanted to see in the case
of surfaces okay and now we go back to
the curves again the whole whole game
that we are playing here in 3-space in
the three dimensional space is it's a
kind of interplay between surfaces and
curves and you have a question
what's the equation that makes that okay
let's see so this is let's actually I'm
glad you asked because because otherwise
we're kind of missing the punch line so
that's the way it is right it's the X Y
Z so it's something which should look
like so first of all it should something
which should look like a parabola in
this direction if I look on the X Y and
it should look like so it should be
hyperbola this is the parabola and this
is a parabola so first of all I want to
have Z and I want to have in the Y plane
I want to have let me try different
colors to kind of indicate you so
there's this green okay
this green green stuff is nothing but y
equals what sorry Z equals y squared
let's forget about this ABC the
coefficients we can conserve ID by those
coefficients later I'll just I'll just
write write write write down the rough
formula for it so this is equal Y
squared so that should be part of the
equation this one right this is like the
parabola I still have the raises it's
right there what else do we have we have
this part of the picture which is also
parabola which is also parabola this one
is but it lies in so this one was in the
G Y plane and this is going to be in the
XZ plane in the XZ plane
maybe I didn't draw there I didn't throw
this coordinate in my selecting - it's
like I'm actually going like this so
that that's the that the Z equals
negative x squared and so what it means
is that you should have V right you
should have V itself negative Y squared
and then you have a should have x
squared that's what is that's what it
should be but because see this what I
did is if I set X equal 0 I said X
approach 0 I get this one so I get this
equation Z equals y squared and if I say
that y equals 0 I get Z is equal to
minus x squared so that's all good right
and so and so finally if I said if I set
V equal some constant I'm going to get
I'm going to get hyperbolas so that's
that's roughly the equation and I'm not
being precise but this is roughly the
equation so it has a Z and it has x
squared + y squared but it with opposite
signs okay now so so the next topic that
we'll discuss is the general curves more
general curves in space
okay
so more general curves in space and
again just like just like four just like
four lines we parameterize them instead
of writing equations because now the
curve has dimension dimension of the
curve is one right so that means we need
one parameter but two equations or two
equations because a curve lives in three
dimension space so each time we write an
equation with dimension drove by one it
has to draw from three to one therefore
we have to write two equations but if we
use parameters we need only one
parameter so it's more economical to use
parameterization instead of writing down
equations so we introduce the new and
you absolutely parameter which usually
we call usually we call it t but they
don't have to we can call it s or fate
or whatever whatever letter you like
just as long as it's different from the
three variables X Y Z and we write F
equals f of T y equals G of T and V
equals H of and of course we recognize
that recognize two two special cases
here one special case is like this when
you don't have the third equation the
third formula you only write x equals f
of T and Y is equal to G of T that would
be a parametric curve on the plane
and we also recognize as a special case
a case of a line where f of t is a
linear function and so are G and M and H
so in a sense when we are when we are
getting lines in 3-space we are also
doing the simplest possible parametric
functions F G and H the functions which
involve only the constant term and the
degree 1 term in the coordinate C now
there is this one there is one
terminological issue which I want to
emphasize when I say equations
I mean equations just involving x y&z
you see because someone can say well
this is this also looks like an equation
so what do I mean when I say you need
one parameter or two equations here I am
actually writing down three equations
that's a terminological issue I don't
think of this as equations because an
equation is something which is a
constraint on on the variables which are
given to you and then this formula
involves not only the coordinates which
are given X Y Z but also some exudative
coordinate okay so this is not these are
not equations well we our equations in
some sense but they are not these are
not what I mean by equations by
equations because they involve involve T
an additional variable additional
variable or what we call parameter you
see that's why I would like to think of
this as parameterization I promised
write that I parameters Y parameter Z
I'm not writing down equations on XYZ an
equation on the other hand it like this
this is an equation this is an equation
it only involves X Y and V there are no
additional variables like T you see
that's the difference is that clear so
don't be confused when I say when I say
equation I don't mean formula like this
I mean formula like this which involves
only the given now someone can say we
can actually interpret this as an
equation but on four variables because
you can think of this now as a system of
equations on variables X Y Z and T which
is actually another way to think about
this in other words instead of starting
in three-dimensional space in trying to
parameterize a curve by one parameter
you can think that what you are doing is
if you are working in a four dimensional
space and you're imposing three
equations because you can look at the
four dimensional space with coordinates
X Y Z and Z and then you can impose this
equations and you see everything is
consistent because this way you start
with the four dimensional space and you
impose three equations so what's the
dimension of the object it's four minus
three the customers and now there are
three equations which is one so it so
consistent you get again one as the
dimension of your object but I prefer
not to think of this expression as a
system of equations in a larger
dimensional space named in four
dimensional space I would rather prefer
to think of this as a way to
parameterize my my curve by this
parameter auxiliary coordinate any
questions about this this is a really
terminological issue but I wanted to
emphasize it because I keep saying
formalization equations and so on and so
I do realize that it could be confusing
okay so what can we do with this more
general what can we do with this more
general parametric curve
well we look at we try to recall what we
did with parametric curves on the plane
and we try to do the same thing here and
one of the things we did was we wrote
down equations for the tangent lines to
this curves and that's what that's what
we'd like to do for curves in
three-dimensional space so let me let me
do it by way of doing an exercise or an
example find parametric equation to the
curve so parametric equation I tipped
towards of the tangent line of the
tangent line to the curve given in
parametric form as follows X is equal to
1 plus C Y is equal to 1 plus t minus T
squared and Z is equal to 1 minus T plus
T squared minus T Q ok
[Music]
at at the point I have the point 1 1 1
so how to do this problem the first
thing you need to do is to check whether
this point actually belongs belongs to
this belongs to this on to the score of
C and this stated clearly does right
because this point this point
corresponds to the value equal 1/3 equal
0 if d is equal to 0 we get 1 1 1 for
all for each x y&z so this of course is
a necessary condition because if it's
not right it's not satisfied if there is
no parameter key for which you get
precisely those coordinates it means
that there is a there is a misprint in
the problem so then you cannot really do
it it's not self consistent so the first
step is to find the value of t step 1 is
to find the value of T which corresponds
to this point and the way you find it is
by solving the equation for example here
it will be 1 plus 2 T is equal to 1
which gives you t is equal to 0 and then
you hope you expect that if the problem
is correct that if you plug that
solution to do to the formulas for y&z
you will get the right values in general
it could be that there are there's more
than one solution that you get from the
first equation so then you have to to
find which one will correspond to this
point in other one in other words for
which value of T you will actually get
that particular point it could happen
also that there are two different values
of
I'm 13 give you the same point
that's called self-intersection we've
seen that when we when we were graphing
curves especially by using polar
coordinates so that's also possible but
if if that's how it happens then the
question would be fine parametric
equations of the tangent lines not just
tangent line because in this stage there
will be two different tangent lines
right this one and this one so the
question indicates that actually the
this point is not the point of the self
intersection but rather it's a point
like this where you actually have a
well-defined unique tangent line okay so
that's step one to figure this out
step two is to write down the equation
of the line and now we have to remember
what information we need to write down
the parametric representation for a line
in 3-space we need a point and we needed
a direction vector unfortunately
fortunately we already have a point 1 1
1 where we have the point so we need the
direction vector
offer this line and the direction vector
is going to be a tangent vector to this
curve and we find it in the same way in
which we found it for curves and on the
plane by taking derivatives making
derivatives of our functions ad for this
value so in general the formula is that
you take F prime of T 0 G prime of T 0
and H prime of T 0 what is 0 is your
value right so which we simply have to
differentiate each of the three
functions and substitute ok it's five
o'clock let me take one minute because
there is one important point and I don't
want to lose it so you see your your
curve is already your curve is already
given by for mutilation of some variable
T and now you're going to write an
equation for a tangent line a tangent
line is a different curve so you should
use a different coordinate to
parameterize it use a different
coordinate for the tangent line you a
different parameter
usually we we can utilize the letter s
SE TS but you can use whatever you want
so for example in this particular case
if you take the derivatives the value of
the derivatives at t equals 0 you will
get to 1 and next one and so the
equation of the tangent line is going to
be 1 plus 2 s 1 plus s and G is 1 minus
that differ equation substantially
ok so we'll continue on Thursday